[Music]
one neutral America
with the outbreak of hostilities on the
continent the United States remained in
a state of peace and qualified
neutrality but a policy of detachment
from international conflict did not
signify that American officials were
unaware that the nation's territory
resources and politics were subject to
penetration and exploitation by the
European belligerence during his first
term as president Franklin D Roosevelt
had become sufficiently concerned about
the trafficking's of fascists and
communists in the country that he urged
Federal Bureau of Investigation director
J Edgar Hoover to begin probing the
activities of these ideologues footnote
see don whitehead the FBI story new york
pocketbooks 1958 first published 1956
pages 188 through 197 in footnote quote
late in 1938 President Roosevelt had
approved a $50,000 appropriation for the
FBI to conduct espionage investigations
a some later raised by Congress to
$300,000 Hoover regarded this
authorization of funds by the president
as giving primary responsibility in the
civilian field to the FBI
no similar appropriation was earmarked
for any other non-military investigative
agency as a result the FBI and the war
departments Military Intelligence
Division worked out a cooperative
program with approval of the Office of
Naval Intelligence to exchange
information in subversive investigations
this arrangement was approved in
principle by the new Attorney General
Frank Murphy On February 7th 1939 the
assistant to the Attorney General Joseph
B Keenan informed other investigative
agencies of the agreement he asked that
they send any information regarding
espionage or subversion to the FBI
Hoover advised his special agents that
Keenan's letter meant all complaints
relating to espionage counter espionage
and sabotage cases should be referred to
the bureau should be considered within
the primary jurisdiction of
Bureau and should of course receive
preferred and expeditious attention end
quote
Keenan's letter elicited angry reactions
from the other various federal
investigative agencies protesting both
the coordination plan and the usurpation
of aspects of their jurisdiction by the
FBI Assistant Secretary of State George
s Messersmith called a conference with
war Navy Treasury post office and
Justice Department but not FBI
representatives and announced that the
president had selected him to coordinate
probes of foreign agents when this
assertion could not be substantiated
Messersmith reversed his position
advocating that espionage investigations
be divided among the various agencies
quote Hoover felt that responsibility
should be concentrated and at a pattern
of close cooperation established war and
navy agreed their intelligence units had
already asked the FBI to handle within
the United States and its territories
the civilian aspects of such espionage
investigations as they were conducting
from the military angle the State
Department however felt that its Office
of Security must keep unshared control
over sensitive information because of
its extreme delicacy and its
relationship to foreign policy decisions
one fact which appears to have weighted
the scales in favor of a coordinated
plan was that nobody wanted a repetition
of the bungling which had during World
War one resulted from snarled lines of
responsibility another was that without
coordination various federal bodies
might all be keeping tabs on the same
individual each from the angle of its
own work without the pieces ever being
put together to form a pattern end quote
footnote Harry and Bonner ro Overstreet
the FBI in our open society New York
WW Norton & Company 1969 pages 85 and 86
in footnote ultimately
it was the president who concluded that
espionage counter espionage and sabotage
information had to be coordinated
accordingly the following directive was
issued on June 26th 1939 two members of
the cabinet quote it is my desire that
the investigation of all espionage
counter espionage and sabotage matters
be controlled and handled by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation of the
Department of Justice the Military
Intelligence Division of the War
Department and the Office of Naval
Intelligence of the Navy Department the
directors of these three agencies are to
function as a committee to coordinate
their activities no investigations
should be conducted by any investigative
agency of the government into matters
involving actually or potentially any
espionage counter espionage or sabotage
except by the three agencies mentioned
above I shall be glad if you will
instruct the heads of all other
investigative agencies than the three
named to refer immediately to the
nearest office of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation any data information or
material that may come to their notice
bearing directly or indirectly on
espionage counter espionage or sabotage
end quote this was subsequently followed
by another presidential directive
pertaining to FBI intelligence
responsibilities issued September 6th a
few days after formal declarations of
war had been made by the European powers
it said quote the Attorney General has
been requested by me to instruct the
Federal Bureau of Investigation of the
Department of Justice to take charge of
investigative work in matters relating
to espionage sabotage and violations of
the neutrality regulations this task
must be conducted in a comprehensive and
effective manner on a national basis and
all information must be carefully sifted
out and correlated in order to avoid
confusion and irresponsibility to this
end I request all police officers
sheriffs and all other law enforcement
officers in the United States promptly
to turn over to the nearest
representative of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation any
information obtained by them relating to
espionage counter espionage sabotage
subversive activities and violations of
the neutrality laws end quote
on September 8th President Roosevelt
declared a national emergency within the
nation thereby granting extraordinary
powers to the executive short of a
condition of war footnote C Frank Murphy
executive powers under national
emergency Washington US government print
office 1939 76th Congress second section
Senate document number 133 and footnote
quote four months later on January 5th
1942 ver told the House Subcommittee on
Appropriations about the steps he had
taken to ready the bureau for its
intelligence function and also about the
consequences of this new assignment and
the outbreak of war in Europe as
measured in terms of workload the field
offices which had been requested earlier
by Army and Navy intelligence had been
opened in the Canal Zone Puerto Rico and
the Philippines field offices had been
opened also near six large shipping
centers or military bases in Albany
Baltimore Savannah Grand Rapids Phoenix
and San Diego with an eye to preventing
espionage and sabotage the Army and Navy
had asked the FBI to assume jurisdiction
for them over plant production
activities in places that manufactured
articles for their use a procedure which
involved no policing but which was
educational and consultative was
currently being applied in 540 plants
and it was capable of expanding to reach
as many as 12,000 in quote a time of
greater emergency end quote
most plant owners had welcomed it and
were giving excellent cooperation at
Washington headquarters a general
Intelligence Division forerunner of
today's domestic intelligence division
had been created to coordinate and
supervise all work related to espionage
sabotage and other subversive activities
and violations of the
trotty regulations it's translation
section made available for use the
substance of subversive foreign language
communications documents and papers its
Code section broke down codes and
decoded intercepted messages also
special investigations were being made
of persons reported to be active in any
subversive activity or in movements
detrimental to the internal security
with reference to those who might have
to be more fully investigated in the
event of an acute national emergency the
results of the special investigations
were being kept on filed end quote
footnote / Street pages 89 through 90
and footnote still in many other regards
the American intelligence community was
insufficient to actual needs during the
Twilight prior to the nation's entry
into the World War as one authority has
observed quote as late as 1938 Army
counterintelligence in the United States
and its possessions abroad consisted of
no more than three officers and 18
agents exactly one of whom spoke a
foreign language even worse the limited
numbers involved in intelligence and
counterintelligence included many who
had neither the qualifications nor the
feel for intrigue frequently career
naval and air officers who demonstrated
no special aptitude in other branches of
service life were relegated to
intelligence work simply to be got rid
of in 1939
despite memories of the substantial
American commitment in the First World
War and an awareness that a new war was
threatening to follow the earlier
pattern the national secret services
amounted to very little end quote
footnote Richard Wilmer Rouen with
Robert G dined or per Secret Service
thirty-three centuries of espionage
London William Kimber 1969 page 613 end
footnote on May 27th 1941 the President
issued a second proclamation of national
emergency saying in part quote I
said on many occasions that the United
States is mustering its men and its
resources only for purposes of defense
only to repel attack I repeat that
statement now but we must be realistic
when we use the word attack we have to
relate it to the lightning speed of
modern warfare some people seem to think
that we are not attacked until bombs
actually drop in the streets of New York
or San Francisco or New Orleans or
Chicago but they are simply shutting
their eyes to the lesson that we must
learn from the fate of every nation that
the Nazis have conquered the attack on
Czechoslovakia began with the conquest
of Austria the attack on Norway began
with the occupation of Denmark the
attack on Greece began with occupation
of Albania and Bulgaria the attack on
the Suez Canal
began with the invasion of the Balkans
and North Africa and the attack on the
United States can begin with the
domination of any base which menaces our
security north or south nobody can
foretell tonight just when the acts of
the dictators will ripen into attack in
this hemisphere and us but we know
enough by now to realize that it would
be suicide to wait until they are in our
front yard end quote
footnote Samuel I Rosenman Kampf the
public papers and addresses of Franklin
D Roosevelt 1941 volume the call to
battle stations
New York Harper & Brothers nineteen
fifty pages 188 and 189 end footnote the
watching and waiting were over America
was preparing for war seven months later
war was a reality
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you